Music.
Thorsten, welcome to the True Metal Stage,
I think that means, doesn't it?
Or in the language of CIM Lingen, the tech track.
My name is Thorsten Butz. I am talking about what is certainly a very special topic.
Well, we all do, but we are connecting two worlds in this session,
which were always very separate in my adolescence as an IT person.
So different religions, Linux, Windows and now Container is
one of many, many technologies where these worlds suddenly merge.
I want to talk about that in a moment.
I have to say two things up front.
The one thing is, it's actually a bit of a sham.
I'm not just talking about Windows Server Containers, there's a bit more to it.
Many people know that in the context of Windows Server Containers there are always
Docker is mentioned and you have to clarify what that actually is. Finally.
And now that I've said that, I have to apologize for the second one.
Unfortunately I'm totally underdressed, because today I found André, who is sitting here in the front.
And I have to say, this is what you have to look like when you talk about Windows Server Container
is talking, right? So let's hear it for André. Nice to have you here.
And thanks for the photo.
Yes, I was just about to say, we've already talked about it,
So that's not how it works. So after the session we'll have to have another quick chat.
Many thanks to the sponsors who make it possible for us to be here.
And yes, let's get on with the actual session. I have a whole one,
very small advertisement up front. gone.
Community is a good keyword. We all have our hobbies,
which we are quite happy to do, without the need for significant capitalist
Have intentions behind it.
And one of my hobbies, besides
the CIM Lingen, is that I'm trying to keep a podcast alive.
I affectionately call it Slowcast because episodes appear relatively infrequently.
I admire the colleagues who do this every week.
And I get a new episode twice a year, three times a year.
But it's all the better for it. And not because of me, but because of the guests.
And I've picked one out of the long series of my podcasts,
because it's also here.
And a good friend of CIM Lingen, Benni Tritsch.
I have a high affinity for asking people about things that used to be quite
were hotly traded. I like to invite guests and try to keep the
Tracing the history of origins.
And if you always wanted to know a bit about remote desktops,
so from the real beginnings, this is really a tip. Not because of me,
but because of Benni Tritsch.
Here he always tells the current status.
This is the obligatory picture. I did it myself because of copyright.
You can't get around it. Windows containers, you always see these strange Euro containers.
And if you really want to draw such a connection between the containers
in shipping and containers in IT, if you are very enthusiastic now
it can be said that these containers have revolutionized the global economy.
How much we are not even aware of. What we call globalization,
would not be possible at all without these extremely cheap imports.
I say that in a completely unbiased way.
And if you are now enthusiastic about IT containers,
you could say that containers will revolutionize our lives,
because it is a completely new species,
providing software, providing solutions in this very agile world
and doing things with minimal effort,
which are otherwise very, very complex. Containers are all about simplicity.
And just like containers in shipping, it's about cost savings. It's about density.
If you think about how many billions of parts are transported and
If you then look at the unit costs, you have a direct analogy to IT.
Every admin immediately thinks, yes, but what about here? We have VMs.
VMs are wonderful. Perhaps with a lot of imagination you can also create such a competitive situation.
or see a similarity, I'll talk about that in a minute.
But none of that matters. VMs are expensive. We could also, of course
without these Euro containers.
At the end of the day, it's all a question of volume.
And when we talk about containers, we always talk about mass deployment.
We are talking about simplification.
We don't always and only talk about security.
Although this is also a big issue with Windows containers.
Whenever people talk about containers
the word Docker appears immediately.
And this play on words is of course not at all coincidental.
Docker is a Linux company. Period.
But this company has obviously done a very good job and has a
made a certain container solution very popular.
And Microsoft was apparently also very enthusiastic about the
Work that is being done.
They once knocked on Docker's door and said, let's think about it,
if we could do something together.
This resulted in a collaboration, which then led to this today,
that when we talk about Windows Server Containers, we always immediately talk about Docker and Linux.
And why this is so and what can be so confusing about it, that's what I want to explain now.
show technical right away.
There is, if you look at container technology now in the focus of Microsoft,
then there are three solutions that need to be seen.
The one gave my presentation the title, the Windows Server Container.
Now my title of this talk suggests that this is a generic term.
But that's not the case. And that makes it a bit difficult now,
to find a title for such a lecture.
Because Windows Server Containers are only one of several types.
The second type is Hyper-V containers.
But I would now call my presentation Hyper-V Container,
then everyone would immediately think of classic virtualization.
And that's why it's always a bit difficult to find the right name.
for such a presentation. So it's actually about containers in general.
And you can see the game types here.
And in fact, we're going to talk about Docker right now.
So really about Linux.
I hope I'm not hurting anyone with this. It's always a total party for me,
if the very first thing I show at a Microsoft-affine event is Linux.
But I have been told by trusted sources in Redmond,
that this is how it is done today.
Holger knows that too, so if you don't run three times a minuteSSH,
Visual Studio Code and any Unix-related tools,
then you are no longer really state of the art.
If you haven't made friends with it yet, you'll see what I mean in a moment.
What is the basic principle?
I say to many customers who always have a hard time with such innovations,
yeah, yeah, sure, I know what it was like back then, 90s.
So, we went to the computer room, data center today.
We still knew every computer by hand. We jumpered network cards.
A great time. We also had no internet. Patching was obsolete.
The famous NetWare server that was walled up and never used again.
Let me put it this way, it was a different time.
When then virtualization came in the sense of VMware and took place in the masses,
I am quite sure that many of us have discussed this,
it can't be safe if someone hacks our VMware host.
All 50 VMs are dead.
I'm sure we've had exactly the same discussions,
which we will, are or will be conducting today via containers.
The point is, VMware, Hyper-V, Xen servers, the whole virtualization thing,
that we have today, KVM, they have simply won because the compromise is right.
The costs are unbelievably much lower than if we were now really constantly
Screw hardware.
And the security is good enough.
Sure, I can also break out of a virtual machine onto a host.
I just have to wait long enough for a bug to be found in the software.
But the probability in relation to the benefit that this will happen is quite low.
So you always have to consider what payload you have? What is my concern?
How sensitive is my data?
That's basically, I don't want to start this discussion right now,
I just want to mention them briefly, it's basically the same thing,
what we always have with these cloud issues, so if we're in an internet
Publish data.
In my eyes they are safer than at home, because there I really have to
do everything to give access only to authorized persons, whereas I might
in my own data center that there is a door,
which I can close.
But if we are honest, even in our data centers I have a
physical access control, but of course...
That's not the point. Nobody who wants something from us physically comes by and breaks in.
You have to keep that in mind. That is, with this scale,
that accompanies us throughout our professional lives,
I started in the 90s with something like virtual hosting,
because everything else was for my
Allotment garden website and not financially viable for my soccer club.
I would also have preferred a root server. It was far too expensive.
Yes, you probably know the chroot environment from Linux,
to make it a little safer.
In BSD there are the jails, which are already very similar to the
have with container technology and containers under Windows, under Linux,
Sorry, the way Docker does it,
are just a compromise and the person who invented Docker,
didn't actually do anything else,
without belittling that now, as existing concepts of the Linux kernel and the Linux
environment by using techniques such as namespaces and simply
if I cleverly combine everything and make it user-friendly,
then I have a high degree of security with maximum density.
That's what it's all about. And when Microsoft worked with Docker
they then very quickly discovered that Microsoft specifically in its
customer environment may have one or two who say,
this isolation that Docker offers is not enough for me,
because there is a possible problem with Docker,
you have to trust the Linux kernel with Docker.
Because the same kernel can be seen on the container host,
who works there, who also does the work in the container.
That is, theoretically speaking, if someone found a vulnerability in the Linux kernel
it can of course break out of the container onto the host system.
And that was one of the basic ideas at Microsoft, we can do Microsoft better.
We can add an additional hardening
by inventing Hyper-V containers. That's a mixture.
From Hyper-V and Windows containers, which is basically based on it,
that I do not pass the Windows kernel into the container,
but duplicate it, so to speak.
So the container gets its own kernel. It is like this under Windows,
that we don't have a monolithic kernel where we can somehow create a file
in RAM, one process and that's it.
But the Windows kernel is very modular.
And that means a lot of processes have to be mirrored in the containers.
And that creates overhead.
What you will notice immediately when you work with it is that Hyper-V containers
are already subjectively much more computationally intensive than Windows server containers.
But you have to think, when does that make sense?
To anticipate the most important question of all,
is this now replacing virtualization as we know it?
No, probably not for the time being, and certainly not in the next few years,
because the typical use case is completely different.
The typical use case for Windows Server Container or Docker Container
is something like WordPress today.
Stuff you provide quickly, because now a new season of House
of Cards is running and you need 10,000 web servers.
Domain controllers are not suitable for this. Not at the moment.
Of course you can think about it, there is always a future, let's see,
how this develops, perhaps these techniques will merge.
If you look at Docker, how that works, I just said,
these are techniques that are all already there.
Google has contributed a great deal to the existence of this technology.
Many others as well, but I think Google is one of the most intense players in this space.
And what has happened now, quite simply in 2013,
that someone has netted this, has developed a kind of store,
the Docker Hub, we'll see that in a moment.
And in this store you can basically download hard disk images.
In other words, if you imagine that you would simply be in the Microsoft
Gallery or download ready-to-run VHDX files from the Microsoft Store
then this has a certain similarity to Images. is.
It's just that you always have such a design goal with containers.
They always say like this, one thing in a container. So we don't mix bicycles
and mopeds in such a container, but only bicycles go in such a container.
This leads to the fact that with a typical solution like WordPress
does not download an image, but you have something like Linux as a basis.
Above that you have a "Müskel", a MySQL, say many.
Or a MariaDB or something else. You have PHP and then on top of that an Nginx or
one Apache and you stack them all on top of each other like this.
From this point of view, this solution might also have been problematic in terms of copyright
Lego, because that's exactly what it's all about.
And if you now look at what that actually is technically,
these images are basically nothing more than an idea of so
Differencing Disks, Overlay File System,
who knows this, I say so keyword Knoppix, the way it works,
you start a DVD and so that you can make changes during operation,
which you can't really do with Knoppix,
Klaus Knopper creates such an overlay FS and you can write in there
and then when you turn off the machine, it's gone.
I think you can see that similarity there.
The really nice thing, and I ask for your understanding,
that I am doing this for strategic reasons alone.
The beauty of Docker and a demo of Docker in general is,
Knock on wood, it's very slim, it's very mature,
that is very reliable.
That's the beauty of a Windows Server Container lecture,
that you would actually like to show Docker first.
But there is another, very important reason for this.
I think a lot of us who are in this room have tried it before,
have tried to approach this topic, but have failed a little,
because you don't know where to start.
If you start googling, binging, you find pages and pages of texts and you know
not at all, where do I start now?
Then you realize that one thing is already obsolete again.
It is very, very difficult to understand Windows Server Container,
as we will see in the second demo.
Because I say cautiously.
But mature is different, I would say.
And mature in the sense that when I buy a car,
then I don't just want one engine.
There are people who tinker with their boxes all day long.
I drive a car like this, which is totally unexciting, because I just want it to run.
And if you want that is transferred to IT, is Windows Server Container,
is not your topic, because it's all command line, it's all web.
And it's not even PowerShell. Now most people think so,
Yes of course, PowerShell as always. No, we're beyond PowerShell again, I'll get to that in a moment.
That's why Docker is much easier to understand. Because everything,
what you have to do, you install a VM somewhere, I already did it, Ubuntudu in front of me.
And then you do Upget, Install, Docker I.O., done.
This is not how the nerds do it. I'll show you in a minute,
how to make it a little better.
But that's enough to try it out. And then you realize, you can see that here
also on the list, no matter what you call, you call as soon as you have Docker,
only ever calls the Docker command.
Now, of course, someone could come up with the idea of saying,
okay, watch out, I'm going to get some coffee. When Windows comes, I'll be back.
Nah, stay here, because I can change the headline,
The Windows commands are completely identical. Let me anticipate that.
Therefore, if you want to memorize this, please memorize everything,
what I am showing now, because it is done one-to-one in the same way under Windows.
And now let's take a look at what that looks like.
I have prepared something.
I hope everyone can read this reasonably well now. I'm on one here,
here below in the red area, I have shown it a bit above with markup,
as a reminder for me, but also so that you can see it better,
A few basic commands.
I'm down here on a Linux machine. This is...
Now they're already getting the first one to have a crisis because they say,
now I'm learning PowerShell all the time, now I have to learn this
Get Linux commands on it.
I'm afraid that's the sad truth. We all can't avoid it now
around, because it all keeps growing together.
This is an Ubuntu and what I've done here is, I've already...
The Docker package repository is stored in the sources list.
Under Debian-based systems it is thankfully so,
for the Windows people something similar to PowerShell-Gallery,
but really complete.
You can specify package repositories via which you install software,
apt-get install, many will know this.
And you can of course enter your own private repository there.
And you can use that now to say, I'm connecting directly to Docker.
Then you save yourself the detour via the distribution.
And that simply has something to do with up-to-dateness. With Ubuntu we currently have
Docker, I don't know, like 1.12 or something and we have 1.17 or something.
So a lot more current than if you go through the distro. We'll see that in a moment.
That is, you can see down here with what I'm highlighting here,
you can see, I have simply entered that my package management directly
Docker asks and I get the latest version.
Do you have to do that? No. For a start, the distribution route is certainly sufficient.
But it's all documented. You can get all the scripts and so on
of course through the slides for download. I make a ZIP package like this.
I think that can help a lot. Just click through it
and to get an idea of how the whole thing works.
Maybe a little anecdote about why it's called Docker.io.
There was already a software called Docker. That is a relatively
insignificant trace software today, but it was already called Docker.
And that's why you had to improvise a bit. If you use the Docker repository
then it is now called Docker-CE or Docker.ce,
depending on what you use. CE stands for Community Edition.
And you can already hear that Docker is now looking for ways to make money.
This means that there will now be an Enterprise Edition, which of course makes the whole thing
doesn't exactly make things any clearer.
You can see above in the markup how to set all this up exactly.
You still need the PGP key for the repository so that it can be checked.
whether the checksums of the packages are correct. I have already done all that.
So, and then we go down here like this and then you see this first part here.
This is where it gets serious. So if I already have Docker, then this is always
the first step is to see which version you have.
Docker version. And I'll say it again, it's exactly the same,
which you also do under Windows, as you will see in a moment.
There is no difference at all.
It will say something else. You may have a different version.
Or the platform, the API says something else.
It doesn't say Linux. So, that's actually all.
docker -version, docker -info is when I call this now,
very complex. You get a lot, a lot of information.
In Windows, it is important that the isolation mode is also displayed there at some point later.
So if you want to know if you have Hyper-V containers as default,
then you can watch it afterwards, for example.
You can see that very nicely here. That's a lot of information.
And then you can see everything that's going on.
That's the whole trick. Like this.
That means we basically know now that it's on.
What always helps is to start the Docker service again.
You could do that with Systems Control. And then, of course, the first
Step, if you now go to a machine where you have never been before, Docker PS.
And now comes the interesting stuff for Windows admins.
Now if you've been living under a rock for the last 20 years and have
never seen Unix, then PS doesn't mean anything to you.
But if you have at least done a little PowerShell,
then you know that there is an alias for Get-Process called PS.
And why does it exist? Because PS under Linux, under Unix the command
with which you look at processes.
And the Docker guys thought, let's just use it so that everyone knows it.
We are not displaying processes now, but we are displaying our containers.
This is relatively easy to remember.
And under Windows, this will cause you to view the running containers with
Docker PS as well.
The only problem is that this doesn't tell you anything under Windows,
because you may not have known PS before.
Then you see, I don't have any, I'm also new, but that's not
quite reliable, because Docker PS only shows the running processes,
the running containers.
PS -a like all also shows you the ones I may have initiated and stopped.
And there you see, oh yo, I actually have a few running already
because they are obviously all stopped, otherwise I wouldn't be seeing them now.
Yes, you always ask yourself, should you do something as trivial as docker run hello-world
show at all? Yes, of course, because it's just part of it.
Let's just do that. But we'll have to explain what that actually means.
exactly what happens with docker run hello-world.
So. By the way, anyone expecting something totally spectacular at this point,
this is already very spectacular, but if you expect something else,
Docker is of course brittle at first, because it's about server workload.
You won't be shown any spectacular graphic surfaces or anything.
This is not made for that, although it is conceivable.
I'll come to that at the end.
What happens when I call docker run hello-world? You have to go back three steps.
The first thing you actually do is when you work with Docker,
you go to the web, go to the website of the company Docker and have a look at
an, what do they do? Then you'll automatically end up in the hub.
The hub is basically the store.
And then you enter things you are interested in. For example Drupal.
Drupal, actually Dutch for droplets, is something most people speak very well.
looks funny. And Drupal is, I think, correct.
And then you see, there is a ready-made solution.
Drupal is a content management system, similar to WordPress, a competitor product.
And I personally think Drupal is very complicated to set up.
It's much, much easier with containers. But Drupal is one of the
many, many solutions that just need a database.
Web server, the wildest configurations. And the basic idea is with containers,
that it's not you as admin who provides that, and that's the really interesting one
part, but that the manufacturer does it.
That is, if there is a community that develops something like WordPress Triple,
who know exactly what they need in terms of prerequisites,
then just let them do the setup exe. Let me give you an analogy for a Windows admin.
You know those setup exes that tell you, hey, you need
a .NET framework, 43, one eighth.
Cancel. And you think to yourself, then install it. There are also setup exe,
they will bring it with them.
And basically that's exactly what it is. They simply have what it takes.
And that is naturally very, very easy with open source products.
I'm not saying that this is fundamentally more complicated with closed source products.
is, but with open source products it's easy at first, because things are
are all reachable anyway.
Now you can also go there and search for Microsoft.
Then you realize, oh, but there are pages and pages.
There's a lot of things now and you might notice,
on the left, I'll show that in the Docker console in a moment.
You notice on the left side it always says Microsoft, then here comes
lots of identifiers. The same, let's take a look at that now,
via the command line.
Let's start with,
docker search drupal.
And then you can see very nicely what I have just done on the web.
The command line clearly shows that there are many containers,
that have anything to do with this CMS in the first place, but there is exactly one that is Official.
And this is now important for the practice, because on the left side you can see
man, at the moment when the Official is, you don't see any on the left side
Prefix. The prefix is the user name.
And if there is no user name, this is checked by Docker.
And that is important again.
Audited means that the developer pays Docker for it, this is their current
Business model that they check.
This is not developed by Docker itself. They just check it.
And conversely, this means everything that is not official,
will not be checked. This is at your own risk.
Let's do the same with Microsoft. Docker Search. I'll do PowerShell directly.
PowerShell, great topic. You were just in Holger's lecture.
You want PowerShell. Maybe you've already shown it.
You want to try out PowerShell and don't feel like installing anything.
And then you see, oh look, there's a container called Microsoft PowerShell. So, exciting.
And it's quite popular, as you can see over here, but you can also see,
it's not official now. Well, it's just provided by Microsoft.
So, that's the whole joke.
Let's take a look at this solution.
Just as I now search for PowerShell, I can also search for hello-world.
And what I then realize is that there is an image that is called that,
and I can then download this image. So let's do this as a final test.
Docker hello- World. Zack. Docker search hello-world would also be a good idea.
So, bang. And then you see, there is again - a lot of laughter - and
up here you can see, ah yes, it really is exactly the same.
So hello-world is on par with everything we've just seen.
To drupal, to PowerShell, etc.
So, how do I work with it now? I have now found something that interests me.
And then I do that with docker-pull.
Second. Docker pull. Yes, and now I can just download a Drupal.
Then it downloads all the pre-requisites. Now it gets dangerous,
because it can now be a longer download.
And now you can see that it downloads things. And the charming thing is now,
if you look at the file sizes that are flying across the web.
Drupal is relatively large. I don't know exactly how big it is in
is the total. We can take a look at that right now.
You typically download things under Linux that are smaller than 20
MB. Depending on what you do, it can of course be huge.
But the interesting thing about this optimization is that you can leave out a lot of things as a container.
That is, the idea behind the container is when we talk about server density,
that we can of course also leave things out of the download,
that we know are already here.
If you transfer this via virtual machines, you also have the
Feeling, why do I actually need a VMWare host on my VMWare host or on my
Hyper-V host 35 times C\Windows\WinSXS?
Couldn't that be left out?
That's the same idea. So, and now you can see, I have Drupal here.
I could start that right now. Let's do the same thing again with docker pull PowerShell.
And I had already downloaded it once, so it could be very good now,
very quickly if I hadn't mistyped.
Microsoft, before that we write a good idea. Because there is nothing official,
we have just seen.
Thank you very much. And then you see Already Exists. That's why it's faster now.
And now check if something is missing and download it.
So, now I've downloaded a few things. You can see a bit
compare. I always know that people are always looking for analogies,
although they are dangerous.
But if you want to install something in a Hyper-V console,
then you download an ISO file beforehand. The only difference is that it is typically gigabytes in size.
If I want to start this now, the way to start it is quite simple.
You saw earlier, I don't even have to download it,
because the Docker client automatically checks to see if I even have it and downloads everything.
This is why you will only ever find docker run in most instructions,
docker run, docker run, docker run.
But if you know in advance that you're going somewhere where you don't have Internet
then it would be a good idea to download it first.
But this is only a tip for lecturers. The rest of the world doesn't care.
So, now the question is, how do I start such a container?
Let's start with something really classic and then I'll come straight to the
PowerShell and then we take another look at Nginx and things like that and then
we come straight to the Windows Server Containers.
I start a container like this,
in which I say, for example, Docker Run Ubuntu,
The problem is, if I do that now, he'll check,
I have an image of Ubuntu then it loads the But the problem is,
then the container starts and nothing happens.
What is the problem?
Running Ubuntu in a container is a super atypical example,
because Ubuntu is an operating system. But I want to install solutions.
This means that Ubuntu is actually only intended for developers, who can now create their own
want to create a container image and then do the following.
They then go and say, why don't you start Ubuntu interactively?
a bash, so that I can make changes there.
And now you see very nicely, now we are for the first time,
we are in a container.
And who knows Jeffrey Snover's quote with the Cattles and Pets,
who immediately knows what this is all about, is that this is exactly that approach.
We no longer have a meaningful host name here,
but we have numbers, because nobody is interested in the host names of containers.
We have an optimization that means I don't even have that anymore
like ifconfig, because what would I need that for?
If I need that, I can install it. But then I have to do things like
do like apt-get install, nope, I have to do apt-get update first,
so that he first knows what I have.
Then I can somehow do apt-get install net-tools.
So a scary fiddle. But I'll say it again,
That's not really your job as an admin. You launch ready-made solutions.
I am now showing you what this actually means.
So, now I'm in the container. Now I say here apt-get install net-tools.
And now I have ifconfig.
Most people say, yes, ifconfig is deprecated. That's why the
I can't do that anymore. But I'm an old man. I want to have ifconfig.
Now you see, now I have ifconfig. And if I now seriously use
I would realize, I close the container, everything is gone.
If I am now a developer who provides a ready-made solution,
I would have to think about how exactly to proceed now?
I could then commit this container, make it available somewhere and you could pull it.
The problem is, this stuff becomes obsolete immediately.
That's why it makes no sense to work like this, even if I do it now in this demo.
But what you want is the Linux variant of desired state configuration.
And this is a Docker file. This means that everything I have just done
I write, I say for the Windows people, in a batch file.
This is called a Dockerfile, but is actually very similar to a batch file.
And then I write in there: run, apt-getinstall.
And then all this happens. And this recipe, I put it on GitHub
and everyone is happy. That's the point.
That's how you want to work with it and you're just the consumer.
And now I'm taking on the role of the consumer.
Now we start docker run Microsoft Microsoft PowerShell and now the same thing again.
Careful, I want to see something. Minus IT.
And then you see, yo cool. PowerShell 6, I'm happy.
All right. Wow. The only problem is, perhaps surprisingly for many.
What kind of operating system do I have now?
Linux. Because there is a very simple rule. Linux container hosts can virtualize Linux.
Offer Linux as a container, but no other operating systems.
No other operating systems in the sense of Windows.
What you can already do under Docker is run a CentOS on an Ubuntu host.
map. That works, but that is also both Linux.
But you cannot run a Nano server. You cannot run a Windows server core
or something like that, because it's a completely different operating system. Nobody wants that either.
Except Microsoft. Because they've figured out that if we now go under
Windows server containers, that's totally stupid,
that we can't support this whole Linux world.
And that is somehow a shortcoming. That's why you'll see
see that Microsoft has a solution for this.
At least in the future. This is currently under development.
That under Windows, under certain conditions, you can use both Windows and
you can also virtualize Linux in the sense of containers.
That's a unique selling point. That will be exciting.
So, let's do one last example so that you can see something again,
which is really relatively true to life.
I'll scroll down a bit so that you can see it at the back.
There are a lot of examples here that you can click through,
how to work with it and I want to show you one, which you can see quite well here.
This part here. Because you can also, if you now simply use a service
run something demonized. This is the normal case.
And what you normally want to run is something like an Nginx.
This is a web server. Apache would be another alternative.
But now I have to consider one thing. If you have just looked very closely,
did you see that the container has such a strange IP address? 172.17.
That is a problem. And when I compare that with my host system,
he has a completely different IP circle, then I will find out,
by default the ge-nat-et.
This means that the web server here is not necessarily visible to me.
And that's why you typically do the following. You do a port forwarding
and says that port 80 is off
of the internal machine is forwarded to my host system with port 80.
A container is then created. You can see that here. And now I can
here and can say, I type in the IP address of my VM.
I know which one that is, 192.168.0.253. And here is my NginX.
Yes, and that would basically be exactly the same now with WordPress Drupal.
You can instantly click, click, click, click, set this stuff up, be happy.
What is still important to understand, but now I have to do a bit of
and show it again up here.
Now, of course, you don't want to stay with this standard website,
but you want to deliver content.
And you can do this in a very simple way. For example,
I'm just showing this up here to save a bit of time,
if you allow, I'll add "-v" to this command from just now.
This means that I mount a directory from my real system
into the container and can then simply place the website on the outside of my host system.
This is the way to work with it.
And if you try it yourself, you'll see that this is it,
what works wonderfully. This is Docker.
Many more examples in here. We could go on and on.
But 45 minutes, it's a quick. It's a short time. So, and now we come to Windows.
Now I can do this quickly because everything you just saw,
you can type it in one to one.
We have enormous amounts of data with Windows Server2016, as always.
And we discover very quickly that if we now work with such giants as Windows with
graphical user interface or Windows Core, if you compare,
here green is core, that's more than half of the data,
that such a graphical server has.
If we work with this, it makes no sense in the container environment.
We want to have miniaturized operating systems.
And for this, essentially for this, Microsoft invented the nano server which
is relatively small with a few hundred megabytes please,
Not for containers, for containers he lives on, I'm getting there now.
This means that in the context of containers, you definitely want to use the nano server
work, that will be important now.
That's what they developed it for. The Nano server is extremely functionally limited.
Anyone who has looked at Windows Server 2016, in the normal way
and wise, who knows that the thing makes little sense in this condition.
For an admin, can't be a domain controller, you can't even activate it.
Okay, you don't have to activate it. But it can't even do Windows updates
import. This cannot be done automatically, you have to do it manually.
Now Microsoft has obviously
thought, well, we'll release it in the first version.
The code name was Tuva. Tuva is a region in the former Soviet Union.
And Tuva has 170,000 square meters, says Wikipedia.
And I always thought to myself, there's more to it, isn't there?
This is not the smallest country.
And I always thought that thing should really be called Codename Vatican.
And obviously someone at Microsoft has heard me.
They thought that with the next release, which is now in October
that the release is called 1709 because October is the ninth month, you know that.
So with the next release of Windows Server there will be an updated
version of the Nano server, which is much smaller and which is then used by these
a few hundred megabytes again significantly reduces the whole thing. This is the future.
I'll say code name Vatican. And now let's do it very quickly.
Many say, well, Microsoft has now somehow moved away from Docker.
adopted the technology.
It is important to note that Microsoft developed the client together with Docker,
respectively the client concept, the API adopted from Docker,
because you had the thought, and it's a good one, if someone wants to use the Docker client
can operate under Linux, then
can also operate Docker directly under Windows, that's great.
That's the idea behind it. And the engine, Microsoft already had that before.
That means Hyper-V was invented in 2008. At least that has nothing to do with Docker.
You then had this project Drawbridge, from which the Container Engine emerged
is, to a certain extent. And then in2013 they started this partnership.
I have a few conceptual slides in the talk on how this works,
that this is also very different.
But importantly, there is one thing that really matters.
You can just say if your machine is also a Hyper-V host,
that you want to have additional process isolation that goes beyond the normal
measure and build a kind of mini-VM. That is the special feature.
And if Microsoft also supports Linux workloads in the future,
Then it will be the case that this requires Hyper-V mode, Hyper-V isolation.
This is what has been announced, keyword Linux-Kit.
How do you set the whole thing up? And now I have to say, if you look at the clock
look, you know, I don't have that much time now. I have a little
to get you drunk. I've been showing Linux the whole time, but I have one more trick.
This is how you set up the Windows server containers. This is a very lengthy procedure.
And the really special thing is when you install the containers,
You're about to see that. Because I'm doing it now.
Then you don't have a front end, but, attention.
Greetings to the Nils. I have shot a video. I have also seen other colleagues.
You can see me installing there in the video now. I am sorry,
that now on the projector it's a bit cut off,
but you can basically see what it's all about.
The whole thing lasts in real time, depending on
Internet line, I'll be careful and say at least 20 minutes.
That's the reason I recorded this and that's now twelve times the speed.
And what you see now is that I am installing two features via the Windows server,
namely both containers and Hyper-V.
Then the machine is about to reboot. The video runs for a total of two and a half
minutes, so we can easily do that in our time.
And now reboot the machine and then you will see,
I have no front ends for administration. Nothing.
No PowerShell commands. Nothing. Now I have to get something,
with which I can manage this. There are two possibilities.
The only sensible thing to do is to install docker.exe. That's what I'm doing now.
I register the Microsoft provider via the Windows package management.
You can get all this as scripts. Try it out. Then we have to reboot again.
And at the end of the day, I have docker.exe. And at the end of the day, everything is exactly the same as on Linux.
Only with the difference. Then I can just start the Nano server etc.
Due to the advanced time, I could go into the server now and show you this.
I hope you believe me that this is really exactly the same.
We are rebooting now. We're about to see Docker-Exe. Then the movie is over
Over. And then let's talk briefly about what happens next.
You can see that now, I'm at the end. And now I'm looking for the command.
There is docker.exe. When I type that in. You may look at the PowerShell ISE,
at the ISE, however you pronounce it, you shouldn't be surprised,
if the font is that funny red. That is not a mistake.
It displays the help function a bit strangely.
You have to be very, very careful using docker.exe in the ISE.
Three quarters of the functions are dysfunctional. That is a very dangerous
Undertaking. Holger is already nodding.
Be very careful. Better do this locally. Do this with PowerShell.exe.
That is, I say, not quite fully engineered.
The Nano server, and this is the price we pay, is now dying, Microsoft has said.
Because they are concentrating on the further development of the Nano server as a container.
Hey, nano server is dead, long live the nano server.
Not everyone likes that, I think it's a shame, but that's another story
Topic. I would have liked to keep the Nano server for General Purpose.
It lives on as a container, it will be reduced. And then the question is,
you have to talk to the .NET developers, what do you do with it?
Is PowerShell Core enough, is .NET Core enough to build useful applications?
That's the next big question.
We have then supposedly, that is not yet published,
less than 50 percent in size.
I'm very curious to see what will come of this. It's an unwieldy subject.
And if you want to try out a bit, here are two tips. First tip,
try this with Linux first.
This is not a Linux advertisement, but it really is easier to understand.
Second tip, there is a product for the desktop called Docker for Windows.
This does everything automatically. However, this is only available for Windows 10 in the
Form, not for the Windows Server. I can highly, highly recommend it.
That makes everything much, much easier. This is what it looks like.
I also have the scripts in the slide.
And then my last point. I hope you still allow this.
Yes, are there no PowerShell commandlets at all?
Look at the version number and you know everything. Windows Server Container
have been published for a year. It is still version 0.1 on GitHub.
I personally think, my private opinion, this is going to die,
if it is not already dead.
That means eternal fame and praise for Holger Schwischenberg,
who never tires of writing articles on hot developer and other sources,
where he compares Docker.exe. Really big thanks, I would like to have the patience.
I appreciate this very much, but the well-intentioned advice is to first look at Docker.exe
to. Yes, thank you very much for that.
The whole thing is still available in the client as Project Barcelona, as a keyword,
where this is simply a security architecture in the background.
And I'm curious to see if we'll be talking about this in a few years' time,
how it went on, whether this is really the giant revolution.
Music.